VEP 95: Introduce abstraction to enable alternative hypervisors (#98)
kubevirt/enhancements: veps/sig-compute/hypervisor-abstraction.md

- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream contributors maintaining virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.

## User Stories

1. As a cluster administrator, I can declare a non-KVM hypervisor as the cluster default, and VMI pods schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific libvirt defaults and mutators without forking the virt-launcher domain converter.
3. As an upstream maintainer, I know exactly where to add validation, testing, and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced.

## Repos

- [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)
- [kubevirt/enhancements](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements) (this VEP)

## Design

### Hypervisor Interface

```go
// pkg/hypervisor/hypervisor.go

type DeviceRequirement struct {
  Resource string
  Count    int64
  Optional bool
}

type DomainProfile struct {
  Type string
  XMLNS string
  Mutators []DomainMutator
}

type DomainMutator interface {
  Apply(*api.Domain, *v1.VirtualMachineInstance) error
}

type ValidationResult = field.ErrorList

> type Hypervisor interface {

Reviewer: I think the main functions we are missing here are 
```
AdjustResources(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, additionalOverheadRatio *string) error
HandleHousekeeping(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain) error
GetMemoryOverhead(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, arch string, additionalOverheadRatio *string) resource.Quantity
``` perhaps more hypervisor specific functions

- Existing call sites inside the converter depend on the interface, keeping shared logic untouched while cleanly isolating hypervisor-specialized code paths.
- Unit tests port alongside the refactor so every converter branch remains covered; new tests exercise the factory and ensure fallback to the KVM implementation when an unknown hypervisor is requested.

### Hypervisor-Specific Defaults

The defaults system is refactored to support multi-axis overrides (hypervisor, architecture, combined) without expanding large `switch` statements.

Precedence (least → most specific):
1. Base defaults (generic cluster configuration driven)
2. Hypervisor layer (e.g. kvm-wide adjustments)
3. Architecture layer (generic amd64, arm64, s390x adjustments)
4. Hypervisor+Architecture layer (fine-grained divergence)
5. Finalization (derived/status + feature dependency resolution)

Rules:
* User-specified values are never overridden.
* Finalization runs once after all mutation layers.

> Interface (single contract):

Reviewer: Thank you! This is definitely better than what we have right now. 
Thinking about his future, I'm wondering what you would think about an alternative approach, not very different...

We could define the interface differently: 
```
type Defaulter interface {
    SetVirtualMachineDefaults(vm *v1.VirtualMachine, clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig)
	SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstance(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) error
}

type BaseDefaulter struct{}

// New static defaultler or we can implement a dynamic registry.
func NewDefaulter(clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) Defaulter {
	hypervisor := clusterConfig.GetHypervisor() 
	switch hypervisor {
	case "kvm":
		return &KVMDefaulter{}
	case "mshv":
		return &MSHVDefaulter{}
    ....
}
```
and then we can implement for each hypervisor in a separate directory:
// pkg/defaults/hypervisors/kvm/kvm.go

```
package kvm

type KVMDefaulter struct {
	defaults.BaseDefaulter
}

// SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstance overrides to add KVM-specific logic.
func (k *KVMDefaulter) SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstance(clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance) error {
	if err := k.BaseDefaulter.SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstance(clusterConfig, vmi); err != nil {
		return err
	}
....
}

// Override setArchitectureSpecificDefaults for KVM
func (k *KVMDefaulter) setArchitectureSpecificDefaults(spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec) error {
	arch := spec.Architecture
	if arch == "" {
		arch = "amd64" // Or from the clusterConfig 
	}
	switch arch {
	case "amd64":
		k.setAmd64Defaults(spec)
	case "arm64":
		k.setArm64Defaults(spec)
	case "s390x":
		k.setS390xDefaults(spec)
    ...
	return nil
}
```
And we will keep the architecture specifc files in 
pkg/defaults/hypervisors/kvm/{amd64, arm64, s390x}.go

and the same for mshv:

// pkg/defaults/hypervisors/mshv/mshv.go
```
package mshv

...

// MSHVDefaulter for MSHV hypervisor.
type MSHVDefaulter struct {
	defaults.BaseDefaulter
}
...
```
The mutators will call it:
```
defaulter := defaults.NewDefaulter(mutator.ClusterConfig)
defaulter.SetVirtualMachineDefaults(vm, mutator.ClusterConfig)
```

Does it make sense?

Reviewer 2: So there are two main differences:
 1. The hypervisor/arch resolution is delegated to the hypervisor level rather than it's declared at the central registry
 2. Switches instead of a central resolution map

Both make sense and will work if you prefer it this way.

However, we want to implement precedence order 
"base->arch->hypervisor->hypervisor/arch", so that we can define defaults for "amd64" regardless of hypervisor. And in this case it's easier to use a resolution map with ResolveDefaultsProvider function rather than switch/if statements.

Reviewer 3: @vladikr I like your suggested approach. The big advantage it bring is, as you mention, to have different files/directories per implementation. I think it's very important that if we keep things in-tree we can come up with different ownership for the different accelerators support (in the form of a working group or something similar).

-----

@EdDev I agree with your long-term view. However, currently I'm far from having a concrete opinion regarding the final API that we need in order for having a fully pluggable solution to support multiple accelerators. For this reason, I think we have two options:
1. Keep this VEP in alpha for a while, until we're confident enough in order to commit to an API.
2. Frame this VEP around having in-tree changes and keep them in-tree until we have more confidence / concrete vision for the future.

WDYT?

Reviewer 4: I think this thread was lost to me and I discovered it too late, sorry.

I was convinced during the discussions on this VEP that the in-tree solution is the one we will aim for the moment. With it, we should achieve the initial modularity that should allow us it extract things in the future.

One point I find very important is not to centralize the defaults, or any other building block.
Each hypervisor should have its own defaults and should register them to a central "engine" and preserve well structured code dependency and code flow.
My expectation here is not to see any changes to areas when a new hypervisor is added.
This should be feasible with little effort by using interfaces and dependency inversion techniques.

# VEP #97: Hypervisor Abstraction Layer

## Release Signoff Checklist

Items marked with (R) are required *prior to targeting to a milestone / release*.

- [x] (R) Enhancement issue created, which links to VEP dir in [kubevirt/enhancements]
- [ ] (R) Target version is explicitly mentioned and approved
- [ ] (R) Graduation criteria filled

## Overview

Introduce a Hypervisor Abstraction Layer that lets KubeVirt plug in multiple hypervisor backends through a consistent contract, while keeping today's KVM-first behavior unchanged. To start, we scope the contract to device selection, domain tweaks, validation and mutation so as to provide a flexible base that can evolve without introducing a major refactor. 

## Motivation

> - KubeVirt currently hard-codes KVM/QEMU assumptions throughout virt-launcher, virt-handler, virt-controller, and node preparation scripts.

Reviewer 5: nit - libvirt/QEMU/KVM

- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream contributors maintaining virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.

## User Stories

1. As a cluster administrator, I can declare a non-KVM hypervisor as the cluster default, and VMI pods schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.
3. As an upstream maintainer, I know exactly where to add validation, testing, and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced.

## Repos

- [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)
- [kubevirt/enhancements](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements) (this VEP)

## Design

### Hypervisor Extension Points

Cluster configuration (`spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration.name`) declares the active hypervisor for the entire installation, and each control-plane package exposes focused extension contracts so downstream implementations only touch the areas they actually need:

> - **Validation webhooks (`pkg/virt-api/webhooks/validating-webhook/admitters/hypervisor/`)** – We introduce a Validator interface that will define validation functions for core KubeVirt resources that have hypervisor-specific constraints, namely VM and VMI. Each hypervisor will provide its own concrete Validator to enforce rules and constraints relevant to its capabilities.

Reviewer 4: Admission control webhooks can be a deployable integration point.
This takes us to the option of having this logic out-of-tree.

Reviewer 6: What if the hypervisor is changed after a VM was admitted? Can this logic be moved into controllers instead?

Reviewer 6: If we do so, the accelerator the VM first ran on would also need to be captured into its status to avoid changing it unknowingly. There more I think about it, the more I think we should keep multiple accelerator out of the API entirely for now.

- Resolve the active hypervisor early and feed it through the virt-launcher converter so hypervisor-specific behavior stays localized.
- Support both admission-time validation and mutation so administrators can enforce guardrails while still customizing VMIs for a given hypervisor.
- Let components request allocatable device resources declared by the hypervisor configuration, avoiding new scheduling primitives.
- Make it simple for downstreams to implement new hypervisors by following a documented contract.

## Non Goals

- Deliver a full implementation of any specific new hypervisor backend.
- Redesign the VirtualMachineInstance API schema beyond additive fields.
- Replace existing Hyper-V enlightenment features or other architecture-specific helpers.
- Mandate new observability requirements; telemetry hooks remain optional.

## Definition of Users

- Cluster administrators who need to bootstrap KubeVirt on hardware that exposes alternative virtualization devices.
- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream contributors maintaining virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.

> ## User Stories

Reviewer 7: > However, supporting multiple hypervisors in the same clusters can be taken up in a follow-up VEP

I believe that adding `spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration.name` would make this impossible in the future. If, however, KubeVirt figures out which hypervisor(s) is available to it based on what devices are exposed by the nodes, it would be possible to add this in the future.

> ## User Stories

Reviewer 8: I have updated the design proposal to make `hypervisorConfiguration` a list, so that it can support multiple hypervisors on the same cluster in the future. Currently, we would enforce that the list contains 0 or 1 items only, thereby enforcing only 1 hypervisor per cluster - a constraint that would be relaxed in the future.

This approach is similar to the approach of specific architecture-specific configuration properties via the `ArchConfiguration` field (https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt/blob/9eb99e17347430d5be4be01e42a56c1cdd3d5585/staging/src/kubevirt.io/api/core/v1/types.go#L3003).

> ## User Stories

Reviewer 7: @harshitgupta1337 have you considered how would this field be computed in (or exposed from) kubevirt/hyperconverged-operator ?

1. As a cluster administrator, I can declare a non-KVM hypervisor as the cluster default, and VMI pods schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.
3. As an upstream maintainer, I know exactly where to add validation, testing, and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced.

## Repos

- [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)
- [kubevirt/enhancements](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements) (this VEP)

## Design

### Hypervisor Extension Points

> Cluster configuration (`spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration.name`) declares the active hypervisor for the entire installation, and each control-plane package exposes focused extension contracts so downstream implementations only touch the areas they actually need:

Reviewer 4: IIUC this implies the hypervisor needs to be specified in the Kubevirt CR.
How about having another section that outlines what is the relation and separation proposed here.
There are multiple options on how to introduce new implementations, from compilation/build, deployment, through code conditions and up to interactions with optional components.

Decisions on having the implementation of new hypervisors embedded into the project codebase or as external extensions through well defined API interfaces is another important point.

Having this discussed in its own section may allow presenting the decision clearly and open an option to propose alternatives.

Reviewer 7: If `spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration.name` is added, there is a risk that a future hypervisor expert would use it in an inappropriate place, complicating the core logic of kubevirt.
Let us assume that in two years time, one hypervisor realizes that they need to deploy a new component on relevant nodes. It would be very tempting for them to add an `if spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration.name=="bla"` into virt-operator, when the proper solution means introducing a plugin mechanism to virt-operator.

Reviewer 7: @harshitgupta1337 thanks for changing the API to allow multiple hypervisors in the future.
However, would you add to the VEP a discussion about why we prefer to have it at all? I think that most cluster admin would prefer to avoid this configuration, letting kubevirt iterate over the worker nodes to find the most prevalent hypervisor. Even if we realize that having an explicit configuration is better, it is far easier to /add/ the field than to drop it.

## Motivation

- KubeVirt currently hard-codes KVM/QEMU assumptions throughout virt-launcher, virt-handler, virt-controller, and node preparation scripts.
- Platform teams that rely on alternative accelerators or hypervisor stacks face invasive forks to replace `/dev/kvm`, libvirt domain types, or resource scheduling hints.
- A scoped abstraction keeps the project approachable for contributors while unlocking new hardware backends.

## Goals

- Document the cluster-wide hypervisor configuration and per-component extension points (defaults, converter, webhooks, node labeller) so downstream implementations can extend behavior without invasive changes to existing components.
- Resolve the active hypervisor early and feed it through the virt-launcher converter so hypervisor-specific behavior stays localized.
- Support both admission-time validation and mutation so administrators can enforce guardrails while still customizing VMIs for a given hypervisor.

> - Let components request allocatable device resources declared by the hypervisor configuration, avoiding new scheduling primitives.

Reviewer 8: Apart from `virt-launcher` there are other components in KubeVirt that assume the use of KVM as the hypervisor.
For example, validating and mutating webhooks in `virt-api`, the virt-launcher pod spec rendered in `virt-controller`, and different parts of `virt-handler` that configures the running virtual machine.

- Make it simple for downstreams to implement new hypervisors by following a documented contract.

## Non Goals

- Deliver a full implementation of any specific new hypervisor backend.
- Redesign the VirtualMachineInstance API schema beyond additive fields.
- Replace existing Hyper-V enlightenment features or other architecture-specific helpers.
- Mandate new observability requirements; telemetry hooks remain optional.

## Definition of Users

- Cluster administrators who need to bootstrap KubeVirt on hardware that exposes alternative virtualization devices.
- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream contributors maintaining virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.

## User Stories

> 1. As a cluster administrator, I can declare a non-KVM hypervisor as the cluster default, and VMI pods schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.

Reviewer 7: I am not sure about this user story. Saying that we have a default, suggests that someone (VM  owner?) can override it and set another value.

Reviewer 7: Sorry if I wasn't clear - I don't fully understand what a "default" means here. I'd prefer
```suggestion
1. As a cluster administrator, I can I would like to deploy KubeVirt on a cluster with non-KVM hypervisor nodes, and have non-KVM VMs schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
```

2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.

> 3. As an upstream maintainer, I know exactly where to add validation, testing, and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced.

Reviewer 7: I think that this is the most important story of this VEP. We need to protect the core of KubeVirt from influences of individual hypervisors, and vice versa. Historically, the maintainers of KubeVirt were experts in all supported hypervisor (all was equal to one), but this would not scale when we add more hypervisors.
```suggestion
3. As an upstream maintainer, I can maintain and develop the core of KubeVirt without deep knowledge of specific hypervisors. I know exactly where to add validation, testing, and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced.
```

Reviewer 8: This is a great addition. Thank you. I am committing it.

- **Validation webhooks (`pkg/virt-api/webhooks/validating-webhook/admitters/hypervisor/`)** – We introduce a Validator interface that will define validation functions for core KubeVirt resources that have hypervisor-specific constraints, namely VM and VMI. Each hypervisor will provide its own concrete Validator to enforce rules and constraints relevant to its capabilities.

  ```go
  type Validator interface {
      // Validate spec of VirtualMachine
      ValidateVirtualMachineSpec(field *k8sfield.Path, spec *v1.VirtualMachineSpec, config *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause

      // Validate spec of VirtualMachineInstance
      ValidateVirtualMachineInstanceSpec(field *k8sfield.Path, spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec, config *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause
      
      // Validate hot-plug updates to VMI. For example, this would encapsulate functionality in the ValidateHotplugDiskConfiguration function.
      ValidateHotplug(oldVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, newVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause
  }
  ```

>  - **Defaults provider registry (`pkg/defaults/providers/`)** – Introduces a single `DefaultsProvider` interface applied in layered order (Base → Hypervisor → Architecture → Hypervisor+Architecture → Finalization). Providers are registered under composite keys like `kvm/amd64` or `mshv/arm64`. Each provider implements:

Reviewer 8: Precisely, this is essentially the core logic invoked by mutating webhooks. What we are proposing here is to allow each hypervisor to set its own default values.

   ```go
    type DefaultsProvider interface {
      ApplyVMDefaults(vm *v1.VirtualMachine, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, client kubecli.KubevirtClient)
      ApplyVMISpecDefaults(spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) error
      FinalizeVMI(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) error
    }
   ```
   Only zero-value fields are set at each layer; `FinalizeVMI` handles derived/status data (CPU topology snapshot, memory status, hotplug sizing, feature dependency resolution). Existing public functions delegate to the resolved provider for backwards compatibility.
- **Runtime interface (`pkg/hypervisor/runtime/`)** – Provides a shared `HypervisorRuntime` contract for runtime-specific behavior such as `AdjustResources`, `HandleHousekeeping`, and `GetMemoryOverhead`.

  ```go
  type HypervisorRuntime interface {
    AdjustResources(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, additionalOverheadRatio *string) error
    HandleHousekeeping(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain) error
    GetMemoryOverhead(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, arch string, additionalOverheadRatio *string) resource.Quantity
  }
  ```

> - **Converter library (`pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/converter/hypervisor/`)** – Implements the new `HypervisorConverter` interface described below. Each hypervisor file focuses on XML/domain differences while `base.go` holds the shared helpers. The converter selects the correct implementation via a local registry keyed by hypervisor name.

Reviewer 4: What is the advantage to require setting each section?
I'm asking about this in comparison to a general `Conver` method.
I.e. each hypervisor vendor can do whatever is needed to handle the logic as a whole.

Reviewer 3: @vladikr and I were discussing offline about possibly moving the converter to use libvirt's domain struct, which is structured. If we do so, we can indeed pass the whole object for conversion. We can then re-use some BaseConverters like you suggested with defaults.

  type HypervisorConverter interface {
      SetDomainType(domain *api.Domain, ctx *ConverterContext) error
      ConvertWatchdog(source *v1.Watchdog, watchdog *api.Watchdog) error
      ValidateDiskBus(bus v1.DiskBus) error
      LaunchSecurity(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance) *api.LaunchSecurity
      SetIOThreads(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain, vcpus uint) error
      ConvertClock(source *v1.Clock, clock *api.Clock) error
      ConvertFeatures(source *v1.Features, features *api.Features, ctx *ConverterContext) error
  }
  ```

- **Node labeller (`pkg/virt-handler/node-labeller/hypervisor/`)** – Adds a lightweight hook so each hypervisor can declare the devices to probe, the preferred libvirt `virt-type`, and optional feature discovery (such as Hyper-V enlightenments for KVM on amd64).

This split preserves the “implement once, reuse everywhere” story without routing everything through a monolithic interface. New hypervisors can land incrementally—start with defaults and webhooks, add converter support, then extend node labelling—while keeping the contract for each area explicit and testable.

### Selection

> - `virt-config` loads cluster-wide defaults from an additive `hypervisorConfiguration` field on the `KubeVirt` CR. The `name` selects the cluster-wide default hypervisor implementation. A dedicated feature gate, `ConfigurableHypervisor`, guards the new functionality:

Reviewer 8: Absolutely get your concern.
At the moment, adding multi-hypervisor support is a big step and the design of integrating code for the 2nd hypervisor in the KubeVirt core repo is to do the 1st step of identifying the extension points first. The next step would be to redesign KubeVirt and add pluggable interfaces for those extension points.
@vladikr and @xpivarc please correct me if I am wrong, this design proposal is targeted to be in Alpha state behind a feature gate currently. I suppose moving it to GA would require a plugin-based redesign based on the learnings we gather.

- A scoped abstraction keeps the project approachable for contributors while unlocking new hardware backends.

## Goals

- Document the cluster-wide hypervisor configuration and per-component extension points (defaults, converter, webhooks, node labeller) so downstream implementations can extend behavior without invasive changes to existing components.
- Resolve the active hypervisor early and feed it through the virt-launcher converter so hypervisor-specific behavior stays localized.
- Support both admission-time validation and mutation so administrators can enforce guardrails while still customizing VMIs for a given hypervisor.
- Let VMs request hypervisor-specific allocatable device resources, avoiding new scheduling primitives.
- Make it simple for downstreams to implement new hypervisors by following a documented contract.

## Non Goals

- Deliver a full implementation of any specific new hypervisor backend.
- Redesign the VirtualMachineInstance API schema beyond additive fields.
- Replace existing Hyper-V enlightenment features or other architecture-specific helpers.
- Mandate new observability requirements; telemetry hooks remain optional.

> 

Reviewer 4: Can this be added?

## Definition of Users

- Cluster administrators who need to bootstrap KubeVirt on hardware that exposes alternative virtualization devices.
- VM owners who would like to run a virtual machines using a non-KVM hypervisor with its differentiated capabilities
- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream maintainers of core virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.
- Hypervisor-specific experts maintaining hypervisor-specific logic and validations.

## User Stories

1. As a cluster administrator, I can declare a non-KVM hypervisor as the cluster default, and VMI pods schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.
3. As a core maintainer, I can maintain and develop the core of KubeVirt without deep knowledge of all specific hypervisors. 

> 4. As a hypervisor-specific expert I know exactly where to add hypervisor-specific validation, testing and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced, letting me develop quickly and independently.

Reviewer 4: @0xFelix , can this thread be resolved?
We know that at least one hypervisor is to be introduced in-tree on U/S Kubevirt for the time being.

The goal of testing for multi-hypervisor support is to ensure that for each in-tree hypervisor implementation, all supported KubeVirt features are verified.

- Unit tests for each hypervisor implementation for validating functionality concerning each extension point with comprehensive coverage for all new code.
- Integration tests should test the following for each in-tree hypervisor:
  - Validate if `virt-handler`'s device plugin can detect correct hypervisor device on the node and label node with correct allocatable and capacity.
  - Validate `virt-controller`'s rendering of `virt-launcher` pod spec.
  - Validate node-labeller's ability to add expected node labels for each hypervisor.
  - Validate runtime adjustments to VMI, such as memlock limit adjustment and housekeeping thread management.

### Integration with existing Prow-based CI testing

To ensure robust validation of the proposed in-tree Microsoft Hypervisor (MSHV) integration, we recommend incorporating MSHV-specific tests into KubeVirt’s existing CI workflows. The following changes are proposed:

- Introduce dedicated testing lanes for MSHV on AMD64, aligned with each SIG (e.g., sig-compute) and Kubernetes version.

> - Enhance the Prow provisioner to support provisioning Azure-based Kubernetes clusters, enabling deployment and testing of KubeVirt distributions backed by MSHV.

Reviewer 3: It was in the unconference IIRC that microsoft developers had suggested to give us access to Azure machines, so it should be fine. (keep me honest if I got this one wrong).

> # VEP #97: Hypervisor Abstraction Layer

Reviewer 3: nit: I think that using the word "accelerator" instead of "hypervisor" would be clearer as it would emphasize we don't aim to replace libvirt or QEMU at this point, only KVM.

Reviewer 4: In old oVirt days, even the manager that integrated with libvirt was called a hypervisor.
From my perspective, the virt-launcher pod is a hypervisor. This VEP discusses a way to support alternative hypervisors, which can cover the virt-launcher as a whole or the way it is composed.

- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream maintainers of core virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.
- Hypervisor-specific experts maintaining hypervisor-specific logic and validations.

## User Stories

1. As a cluster administrator, I can I would like to deploy KubeVirt on a cluster with non-KVM hypervisor nodes, and have non-KVM VMs schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.
3. As a core maintainer, I can maintain and develop the core of KubeVirt without deep knowledge of all specific hypervisors. 
4. As a hypervisor-specific expert I know exactly where to add hypervisor-specific validation, testing and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced, letting me develop quickly and independently.

## Repos

- [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)
- [kubevirt/enhancements](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements) (this VEP)

## Design

### Hypervisor Extension Points

> Cluster configuration (`spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration`) declares the list of supported hypervisors for the KubeVirt installation, and each control-plane package exposes focused extension contracts so downstream implementations only touch the areas they actually need:

Reviewer 3: I wonder if that's really needed at this point.

If we indeed aim to support a single cluster-wide accelerator at this point, and we're not sure how the API will look like in the future, perhaps it's better to somehow inject this setting in a more manual way, e.g. through command line flags to the different components or a build-time argument.

Reviewer 6: Thinking about it again, I agree that adding `spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration` while limiting it to a single hypervisor sounds reasonable.

  
  A dedicated feature gate, `ConfigurableHypervisor`, guards the new functionality:

    ```yaml
    spec:
      configuration:
        hypervisorConfiguration:
        - name: kvm
          hypervisorDevice: kvm
          virtType: kvm
        developerConfiguration:
          featureGates:
            - ConfigurableHypervisor
    ```

- `virt-controller` reads the configured hypervisor from `ClusterConfig` when generating launcher manifests and threads that ID through the `ConverterContext` so downstream components can act consistently.
- Each package's registry uses the configured name to locate its implementation, avoiding a monolithic factory while keeping selection logic consistent.

### Integration with Defaults, Runtime, Converter and Validating Webhooks

> 1. The proposed `Validator` interface's hypervisor-specific implementation would be resolved and invoked from within the `Admit` function of the concerned `Admitter` implementations - e.g., `VMsAdmitter`, `VMICreateAdmitter`, `VMIUpdateAdmitter`, `VMIRSAdmitter`, etc.

Reviewer 9: Why don't we resolve this on startup?

5. When virt-launcher converts the VMI, it instantiates both the `Converter` and the Hypervisor Runtime interfaces. The hypervisor-specific instance of the `Converter` interface leverages common conversion functions as well as hypervisor-specific functions to convert VMI to Libvirt domain.
6. The virt-launcher component will continue to leverage existing helpers for common functionality, such as setLaunchSecurity, disk configuration, and network setup. Hypervisor-specific extensions to the converter logic will extend the base implementation of these helpers to introduce specialized logic.

### Converter Restructuring Inside Virt-launcher

- The existing `pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/converter` package becomes a reusable library with a new `hypervisor` subpackage. Introduce a new interface named `HypervisorConverter` that exposes the main functions for converting VMI spec to Libvirt domain XML.

  ```golang
  type Converter interface {

>     Convert_v1_VirtualMachineInstance_To_api_Domain(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain, c *ConverterContext) (err error)

Reviewer 6: As mentioned in our call yesterday, did you check that this still aligns with the recent refactorings of the converter?

    
    // Validate hot-plug updates to VMI. For example, this would encapsulate functionality in the ValidateHotplugDiskConfiguration function.
    ValidateHotplug(oldVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, newVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause
}
```

The above `Validator` interface would be implemented by the `BaseValidator` that contains validation functionality common across hypervisors and architectures.

```go
type BaseValidator struct {}

func (b *BaseValidator) ValidateVirtualMachineInstanceSpec (field *k8sfield.Path, spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec, config *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause {
    var causes []metav1.StatusCause
    ... // more validation functions
    causes = append(causes, b.validateNUMA(field, spec)...)
    causes = append(causes, b.validateGuestMemoryLimit(field, spec)...)
    ... // more validation functions
}

func (b *BaseValidator) validateNUMA(field *k8sfield.Path, spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec, config *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause {
    // generic (hypervisor/arch-agnostic) logic for validation of VMI's NUMA spec
}
```

> Each hypervisor-specific implementation of the validator would embed the `BaseValidator` to inherit the common validation logic. A skeleton implementation for MSHV-specific Validator implementation is shown below.

Reviewer 8: I made the choice of this design to be able to override specific functions of the base implementation (BaseValidator in this case), which composition does not allow out of the box.
I acknowledged that we might be able to relax the requirement of overriding the base implementation, in which case a builder pattern suffices. Maybe that's something to be considered during the implementation phase?

  - Validate if `virt-handler`'s device plugin can detect correct hypervisor device on the node and label node with correct allocatable and capacity.
  - Validate `virt-controller`'s rendering of `virt-launcher` pod spec.
  - Validate node-labeller's ability to add expected node labels for each hypervisor.
  - Validate runtime adjustments to VMI, such as memlock limit adjustment and housekeeping thread management.

### Integration with existing Prow-based CI testing

To ensure robust validation of the proposed in-tree Microsoft Hypervisor (MSHV) integration, we recommend incorporating MSHV-specific tests into KubeVirt’s existing CI workflows. The following changes are proposed:

- Introduce dedicated testing lanes for MSHV on AMD64, aligned with each SIG (e.g., sig-compute) and Kubernetes version.
- Enhance the Prow provisioner to support provisioning Azure-based Kubernetes clusters, enabling deployment and testing of KubeVirt distributions backed by MSHV.
- Optimize CI resource usage by scheduling non-KVM hypervisor tests during the second phase of CI execution—triggered after the /lgtm label is applied—when comprehensive validation runs are performed.

> ## Implementation Phases

Reviewer 4: Testing is an integral part of stage 3, it cannot be deferred to its own phase.

I'm not sure about the 2nd phase, just because I do not know how it can be examined for correctness without seeing step 3. Perhaps we can include placeholders to represent the future hypervisor, such that the reviewers will see how it looks like. Step 3 will just replace them with the actual.

- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream maintainers of core virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.
- Hypervisor-specific experts maintaining hypervisor-specific logic and validations.

## User Stories

1. As a cluster administrator, I can I would like to deploy KubeVirt on a cluster with non-KVM hypervisor nodes, and have non-KVM VMs schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.
2. As a platform engineer, I can supply hypervisor-specific VMI spec mutations and libvirt domain adjustments without forking the virt-launcher converter.
3. As a core maintainer, I can maintain and develop the core of KubeVirt without deep knowledge of all specific hypervisors. 
4. As a hypervisor-specific expert I know exactly where to add hypervisor-specific validation, testing and documentation when a new hypervisor is introduced, letting me develop quickly and independently.

## Repos

- [kubevirt/kubevirt](https://github.com/kubevirt/kubevirt)
- [kubevirt/enhancements](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements) (this VEP)

## Design

### Hypervisor Extension Points

> Cluster configuration (`spec.configuration.hypervisorConfiguration`) declares the list of supported hypervisors for the KubeVirt installation, and each control-plane package exposes focused extension contracts so downstream implementations only touch the areas they actually need:

Reviewer 8: Updated.

        SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstanceSpec(clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec) error
    }
   ```
   Only zero-value fields are set at each layer; `FinalizeVMI` handles derived/status data (CPU topology snapshot, memory status, hotplug sizing, feature dependency resolution). Existing public functions delegate to the resolved provider for backwards compatibility.
- **Runtime interfaces (`pkg/hypervisor/runtime/`)** – Provides interfaces for tuning a running VM or interacting with the virtualization stack outside of Libvirt. 
  1.  `DomainTuner` interface for tuning a running virtual machine.
      ```go
      type DomainTuner interface {
          // Adjust memlock limit for QEMU process
          AdjustResources(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, additionalOverheadRatio *string) error
          // Assign housekeeping CPU threads to housekeeping cgroup
          HandleHousekeeping(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain) error
      }
      ```

  2. `HypervisorCapabilityExtractor` interface for querying the hypervisor device for its capabilities.
      ```go

>       type HypervisorCapabilityExtractor interface {

Reviewer 3: Sorry for [circling back](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/98/files#r2541431389) to the naming topic, but I truly feel that we can save significant amounts of confusion in the future if we come up with concrete terms now for the different layers, especially since this will eventually become a public external API.

I think we need to come up with something like:
* KVM/MSHV layer - "Accelerator".
* QEMU/Cloud hypervisor - "Emulator".
* Libvirt - "Hypervisor".

We can discuss the different options, and we can do that in a follow-up PR to unblock the main design, but I think it would be much easier to settle this early in the process.

      networkConfigurator: network.NewDomainConfigurator(
        network.WithDomainAttachmentByInterfaceName(c.DomainAttachmentByInterfaceName),
        network.WithUseLaunchSecuritySEV(c.UseLaunchSecuritySEV),
        network.WithUseLaunchSecurityPV(c.UseLaunchSecurityPV),
      ),
      tpmConfigurator: compute.TPMDomainConfigurator{},

      serialDeviceConverter: baseSerialDeviceConverter,
    }
  }
  ```

  When instantiating a hypervisor-specific converter, the base configurators can be overridden or extended. Furthermore, conversion logic that lives in a function and not in a configurator can also be overridden.

  ```go
  func NewMshvConverter(c *ConverterContext) *MshvConverter {
    baseConverter := NewBaseConverter(c)

    // Override the base domain configurator
    baseConverter.domainConfigurator = MshvDomainConfigurator{}
    // Add an extra configurator
    baseConverter.extraConfigurators = append(baseConverter.extraConfigurators, ExtraMshvConfigurator{})

    // Custom serial attachment function to override the base
    baseConverter.serialDeviceConverter = customMshvSerialDeviceConverter

    return &MshvConverter{
      baseConverter: baseConverter,
    }
  }

>   ```

Reviewer 8: Absolutely. I understand that the way we are using struct embedding is different from the idiomatic way.
We can take the discussion in the implementation phase.
The main reason for proposing what we have in the VEP, is because we wanted to override certain specific functions in the `BaseConverter` implementation, while re-using the implementation of `Convert_v1_VirtualMachineInstance_To_api_Domain` in the `BaseConverter`.
This difference is most evident in the Defaults component - and I have used similar implementation style for all components where multi-hypervisor support is added.

- Make it simple for downstreams to implement new hypervisors by following a documented contract.

## Non Goals

- Support multiple hypervisors/accelerators on the same KubeVirt deployment.
- Extension of `VMI` CRD to introduce `Hypervisor` field. Since multiple hypervisors/accelerators in the same KubeVirt deployment is not in scope, VMIs do not need to explicitly specify the target hypervisor.
- Redesign the VirtualMachineInstance API schema beyond additive fields.
- Replace existing Hyper-V enlightenment features or other architecture-specific helpers.
- Mandate new observability requirements; telemetry hooks remain optional.

## Definition of Users

- Cluster administrators who need to bootstrap KubeVirt on hardware that exposes alternative virtualization devices.
- VM owners who would like to run a virtual machines using a non-KVM hypervisor with its differentiated capabilities
- Platform vendors integrating proprietary or emerging hypervisor stacks with KubeVirt.
- Upstream maintainers of core virt-launcher, virt-controller, and virt-handler.
- Hypervisor-specific experts maintaining hypervisor-specific logic and validations.

## User Stories

> 1. As a cluster administrator, I can I would like to deploy KubeVirt on a cluster with non-KVM hypervisor nodes, and have non-KVM VMs schedule only on nodes that expose its required devices.

Reviewer 9: `I can I would like to de` -> `I would like to de`

      ValidateHotplug(oldVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, newVmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, cc *virtconfig.ClusterConfig) []metav1.StatusCause
  }
  ```

 - **Defaults provider registry (`pkg/defaults/providers/`)** – Introduces a single `DefaultsProvider` interface applied in layered order (Base → Hypervisor → Architecture → Hypervisor+Architecture → Finalization). Providers are registered under composite keys like `kvm/amd64` or `mshv/arm64`. Each provider implements:
   ```go
    type DefaultsProvider interface {
        SetVirtualMachineDefaults(vm *v1.VirtualMachine, clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, virtClient kubecli.KubevirtClient)
        SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstance(clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance) error
        SetDefaultVirtualMachineInstanceSpec(clusterConfig *virtconfig.ClusterConfig, spec *v1.VirtualMachineInstanceSpec) error
    }
   ```
   Only zero-value fields are set at each layer; `FinalizeVMI` handles derived/status data (CPU topology snapshot, memory status, hotplug sizing, feature dependency resolution). Existing public functions delegate to the resolved provider for backwards compatibility.

> - **Runtime interfaces (`pkg/hypervisor/runtime/`)** – Provides interfaces for tuning a running VM or interacting with the virtualization stack outside of Libvirt. 

Reviewer 9: Why don't we place it under `virt-handler`?

          AdjustResources(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, additionalOverheadRatio *string) error
          // Assign housekeeping CPU threads to housekeeping cgroup
          HandleHousekeeping(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain) error
      }
      ```

  2. `HypervisorCapabilityExtractor` interface for querying the hypervisor device for its capabilities.
      ```go
      type HypervisorCapabilityExtractor interface {
        GetHypervFeatures() []string
      }
      ```

  3. `VirtLauncherResourceRenderer` for computing resource requirement of the `virt-launcher` pod.
      ```go
      type VirtLauncherResourceRenderer interface {
        GetMemoryOverhead(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, arch string, additionalOverheadRatio *string) resource.Quantity
      }
      ```
          

- **Converter library (`pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/converter/`)** – Adds a new `Converter` interface, which contains the main function to convert VMI to Libvirt domain.

  ```golang
  type Converter interface {
    Convert_v1_VirtualMachineInstance_To_api_Domain(vmi *v1.VirtualMachineInstance, domain *api.Domain, c *ConverterContext) (err error)

>   }

Reviewer 9: This should still be addressed.

> 

Reviewer 10: I don't know where else to put it, as I'm not _that_ closely familiar with kubevirt or libvirt internals -- but does "custom XML for libvirt domain spec" make sense anywhere in this proposal? Supporting that might allow more immediate support for some features of custom hypervisors/virtualizers which have no direct support in Kubevirt. (Fictitious driver features: "We support iSCSI with additional tweaks to retry logic if you just throw in this custom XML" or "We support webhooks on events such as user ejecting the virtual floppy")

Reviewer 6: @harshitgupta1337 is correct, in principle this is possible with hook sidecars today (there are some gotchas though). It should be kept out of this proposal.

Reviewer 4: @ivucica , can this thread be resolved?

  ```

  The `BaseConverter` struct that implements the above interface would contain common functionality for VMI to domain conversion. Each hypervisor will be able to implement their own converter, e.g., `MshvConverter`, embed the `BaseConverter` and override certain functions of the `BaseConverter` with their own.

- **Node labeller** – Adds parameters `--virt-type` and `--hypervisor-device` to the `cmd/virt-launcher/node-labeller/node-labeller.sh` script, so that it can correctly query Libvirt for node and domain capabilities.

This split preserves the “implement once, reuse everywhere” story without routing everything through a monolithic interface. New hypervisors can land incrementally—start with defaults and webhooks, add converter support, then extend node labelling—while keeping the contract for each area explicit and testable.

### Selection

> - `virt-config` loads cluster-wide defaults from an additive `hypervisor` field on the `KubeVirt` CR. The `hypervisor` field is a list of hypervisors that can be supported on the cluster. 

Reviewer 4: This relates also to the discussion [here](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/98/files#r2490226840).
I would personally prefer to start from a less intrusive API, one that does not require changing each time we add a different hypervisor or in case we decide to support hybrid cluster hypervisors.

>   **Single-hypervisor Constraint:** In the current VEP, we will enforce that the number of elements in this list is less than or equal to 1, i.e., to enforce only a single hypervisor for the entire cluster. A future VEP will consider adding support for multiple hypervisors on the same cluster. The `name` in each hypervisor configuration entry selects the cluster-wide hypervisor implementation. Supporting multiple hypervisors in the same cluster will also necessitate the addition of a per-VMI field `hypervisor` to denote on which hypervisor the VMI has to be created.

Reviewer 8: Thanks for bringing this up again. I have updated the VEP to explicitly call it out.
```
**Backwards compability:** If the list of `hypervisorConfiguration` is empty or is not specified at all in the `KubevirtConfiguration` CR, the cluster will fallback to the default KVM hypervisor for all VMIs. The same fallback behavior will be enforced if the feature gate `ConfigurableHypervisor` is not active.
```

  **Single-hypervisor Constraint:** In the current VEP, we will enforce that the number of elements in this list is less than or equal to 1, i.e., to enforce only a single hypervisor for the entire cluster. A future VEP will consider adding support for multiple hypervisors on the same cluster. The `name` in each hypervisor configuration entry selects the cluster-wide hypervisor implementation. Supporting multiple hypervisors in the same cluster will also necessitate the addition of a per-VMI field `hypervisor` to denote on which hypervisor the VMI has to be created.
  

>   A dedicated feature gate, `ConfigurableHypervisor`, guards the new functionality:

Reviewer 4: The VEP suggests to perform a refactor of the current code, to extract existing KVM assumption into a modular code, allowing additional hypervisors to be used instead. This refactoring does not require a FG as there is no functionality to protect.
New hypervisors are possible only if one deploys or configures something explicitly. That, and only that, will trigger a change in underlying behavior to use a different hypervisor.
Therefore, the question that comes to mind is: What will the FG protect against? It will be another knob to just ignore other hypervisors? Can we make this explicit?

}
```

Embedding hierarchy examples:
```go
type BaseDefaults struct{}
type KVMDefaults struct { *BaseDefaults }
type MSHVDefaults struct { *BaseDefaults }
type ArchAMD64Defaults struct { *BaseDefaults }
type ArchArm64Defaults struct { *BaseDefaults }
type ArchS390XDefaults struct { *BaseDefaults }
// Combined
type KVMAmd64Defaults struct { *KVMDefaults }
type KVMArm64Defaults struct { *KVMDefaults }
type KVMS390XDefaults struct { *KVMDefaults }
type MSHVAmd64Defaults struct { *MSHVDefaults }
```

Resolution map (composite key):
```go
var providers = map[string]DefaultsProvider{
  "kvm/amd64":  &KVMAmd64Defaults{&KVMDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}}},
  "kvm/arm64":  &KVMArm64Defaults{&KVMDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}}},
  "kvm/s390x":  &KVMS390XDefaults{&KVMDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}}},
  "mshv/amd64": &MSHVAmd64Defaults{&MSHVDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}}},
  "kvm":        &KVMDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}},
  "mshv":       &MSHVDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}},
  "amd64":      &ArchAMD64Defaults{&BaseDefaults{}}, // optional generic arch layer
  "arm64":      &ArchArm64Defaults{&BaseDefaults{}},
  "s390x":      &ArchS390XDefaults{&BaseDefaults{}},
  "":           &BaseDefaults{},

> }

Reviewer 4: Assuming we aim here to an in-tree solution for now, decoupling is this a thing.
- Arch specific code should not be centralized, each should be placed in its own package and not be effected by changes on other arch codebase.
- Hypervisor specific code should not be centralize, ...

Therefore, to me, the structure of the packages should looks something similar to this:
```yaml
- Hypervisors
   - A
     - Spec (Common for all arch)
     - Arch1
       - Spec Defaults
     - Arch2
       - Spec Defaults
   - B
     - Spec (Common for all arch)
     - Arch1
       - Spec Defaults
     - Arch2
       - Spec Defaults   
```

}
```

When an instance of the `BaseDefaults` struct is created, each function field for setting default values is initialized with its default implementation.

A hypervisor-specific implementation of `DefaultsProvider` interface would leverage struct embedding to override specific functions in the default implementation, while reusing the rest. 

```go
type MSHVDefaults struct {
	base_defaults.BaseDefaults
}

// To instantiate the MSHVDefaults struct
baseDefaults := base_defaults.NewBaseDefaults(
  arch_defaults.NewAmd64ArchDefaults(),
  arch_defaults.NewArm64ArchDefaults(),
  arch_defaults.NewS390xArchDefaults(),
)

// Override the default provider function for a specific VMI field
baseDefaults.defaultEvictionStrategySetter = MshvCustomDefaultEvictionStrategySetter

// Create MSHVDefaults with the overridden BaseDefaults
mshvDefaults := mshv_defaults.MSHVDefaults{
  *baseDefaults
}
```

Similarly, if a particular hypervisor-specific defaults provider, e.g., `MSHVDefaults` needs to override an architecture-specific default provider, it can do it in the same way as above.

Migration steps:
1. Introduce interface + base provider wrapping existing logic (no behavior change).

> 2. Move architecture-specific functions into provider structs; keep old functions as thin wrappers (marked deprecated).

Reviewer 8: I don't think this section is needed, as its already covered in the `Implementation Phases`.

     // assign housekeeping CPU threads to appropriate cgroup
     return nil
   }
   ```

3. **Converter** – Add `pkg/virt-launcher/virtwrap/converter/sample.go` implementing the `Converter` interface embedding the BaseConverter (overriding only the methods that differ from the `BaseConverter`).

    ```go
    type SampleConverter struct {
      baseConverter *BaseConverter
    }

    func NewSampleConverter(c *ConverterContext) *SampleConverter {
      baseConverter := NewBaseConverter(c)

      // Override the base domain configurator
      baseConverter.domainConfigurator = SampleDomainConfigurator{}
      // Add an extra configurator
      baseConverter.extraConfigurators = append(baseConverter.extraConfigurators, ExtraSampleConfigurator{})

      // Custom serial attachment function
      baseConverter.serialDeviceConverter = customSampleSerialDeviceConverter

      return &SampleConverter{
        baseConverter: baseConverter,
      }
    }
    ```

4. **Admission** – Create `pkg/virt-api/webhooks/validating-webhook/admitters/hypervisor/sample.go` that exports `MutateVMI` and `Validate` functions and register them in the webhook registry.

> ### Alternative Designs Considered

Reviewer 4: Continuing the discussion from the [user-story section](https://github.com/kubevirt/enhancements/pull/98/files#r2490226840).

Another alternative is a deployed admission-hook that annotates the VM/VMI with the cluster preferred hypervisor has added value:
- It is easily extendable without strong dependency on KV CR.
- It can start as a simple logic to annotate the same hypervisor for all CRs, and extend the logic later to do so per a specific criteria (e.g. selectors).
- Easier to test negative flows.
- No need to consider KV CR editation and its edge scenarios it introduces.
- Considers the future pluggable solution without any special/costly investment.

Changing the possible values in the Kuvevirt CR field is more intrusive over having something deploy-able.

The admission webhook is an example of a deployable logic over a configuration knob.

For the initial implementation of multi-hypervisor support, we chose an in-tree design to achieve a working solution faster. This approach allows us to validate the abstraction layer, experiment with real-world scenarios, and identify what works and what does not. With these learnings, we will be better positioned to propose a robust plugin-based architecture for multi-hypervisor support in the future.

#### Alternatives to KubeVirt CR API change

This VEP proposes to add the `HypervisorConfiguration` field to the `KubevirtConfiguration` CRD. The rationale behind this choice was to allow the cluster admin to declare outright which hypervisor they want KubeVirt to target. Furthermore, it follows the `ArchConfiguration` field in `KubevirtConfiguration` CRD. In addition, we also considered the following alternatives to configure KubeVirt to target a specific hypervisor:

- **Use a separate CRD**: Devise a `KubeVirtHypervisorConfiguration` CRD. If it is found in the `kubevirt` namespace, use it. If not, fall back to `KVM`. This is an approach that meets our requirements, but we prefer to add the `HypervisorConfiguration` field following the precedent of `ArchConfiguration`.

> - **Querying Worker Nodes**: Iterate over worker nodes and look for a telltale device. If no special devices are found, fall back to KVM. In this approach, since the target hypervisor is not declared outright for the cluster, it would require a `Hypervisor` field in the `VMI` CRD. In this VEP, we do not have extension of `VMI` CRD in scope.

Reviewer 8: Yes and, in fact, we already are using a device plugin to add allocatable KVM resources to a node.
In the alternative approach described here, there would be multiple device plugins, one for each hypervisor/accelerator. Each device plugin would advertise its resource on the node. But since there is no cluster-wide hypervisor configuration, we would need to specify it in the VMI spec so that it can be scheduled on the right node and request the hypervisor device from the plugin.

In contrast, in the proposed approach, we would have only 1 device plugin for managing the hypervisor/accelerator device. Which device it should look for (e.g., `/dev/kvm` or `/dev/mshv`) would be set based on the cluster-wide hypervisor configuration.

> - **Use a separate CRD**: Devise a `KubeVirtHypervisorConfiguration` CRD. If it is found in the `kubevirt` namespace, use it. If not, fall back to `KVM`. This is an approach that meets our requirements, but we prefer to add the `HypervisorConfiguration` field following the precedent of `ArchConfiguration`.

Reviewer 4: I find this reasoning a bit weak.
There are several advantages to choose this one, including the ability to change the API easier, have a more granular permission scheme, deployability and a better fit for the future out-of-tree extension.

What are the cons of going this way?

- Converter mutators execute in a deterministic order to avoid combinatorial growth in conditionals.

## Update/Rollback Compatibility

- The feature is additive. Clusters without hypervisor configuration continue to use KVM exclusively.
- Rolling back to a version without the abstraction reverts to the existing KVM default once the new configuration field is removed or ignored.

## Functional Testing Approach

The goal of testing for multi-hypervisor support is to ensure that for each in-tree hypervisor implementation, all supported KubeVirt features are verified.

- Unit tests for each hypervisor implementation for validating functionality concerning each extension point with comprehensive coverage for all new code.
- Integration tests should test the following for each in-tree hypervisor:
  - Validate if `virt-handler`'s device plugin can detect correct hypervisor device on the node and label node with correct allocatable and capacity.
  - Validate `virt-controller`'s rendering of `virt-launcher` pod spec.
  - Validate node-labeller's ability to add expected node labels for each hypervisor.

>   - Validate runtime adjustments to VMI, such as memlock limit adjustment and housekeeping thread management.

Reviewer 4: We do not have any integration or component tests (except one small exception with the networking drivers).
AFAIK we have only e2e tests which cover anything beyond a small unit of logic.

Are you planning to add this new group of tests?

2. Add the `HypervisorConfiguration` CR to KubeVirt API and the `hypervisor` field to the `KubevirtConfiguration` CR. Add the `ConfigurableHypervisor` feature gate.

3. For each interface, add the MSHV implementation that is gated by the `ConfigurableHypervisor` feature gate.

4. Add testing scripts to enable testing KubeVirt on an MSHV platform.

## Graduation Requirements

### Alpha

- Feature gate covers configurable hypervisor
- Validation webhook for KubeVirt CR enforce that hypervisor configuration contains at most 1 entry, thereby enforcing only 1 supported hypervisor in the cluster.
- Cluster-wide hypervisor configuration implemented and consumed by defaults, converter, and webhooks.
- Basic functional tests for alternative hypervisor scheduling and domain generation.
- Update of the `HypervisorConfiguration` value in KubeVirt CR after a KubeVirt deployment is running will not result in any change to the deployment. This setting is only to be used at the deployment time.

> ### Beta

Reviewer 4: What features are expected to be covered in this phase?

What about the out-of-tree move?

- Monitoring and observability hooks consumed by community dashboards.
- Upgrade/rollback testing executed in CI.

> - Updating `HypervisorConfiguration` value in the KubeVirt CR should trigger a restart of the `virt-handler` and should allow VM management with the new hypervisor.

Reviewer 4: This seems to futuristic. I would not expect any core component to restart on KV CR change and this point is debatable for the future design.

You could just mention that changing of the hypervisor is supported. (I find it extreme to be honest)
